So, in this unit we are going to look at searching
and sorting for a value in a list of values.
So, let us review how lists of values are
actually stored in a computer.
So, there are two basic ways of storing a
sequence as you know arrays and lists.
Now, functionally they may looks similar,
but from a complexity theory point of view,
from an efficiency point of view, how the
data is organized makes a difference.
So, let us just review some basics ideas about
arrays and lists.
So, an array to begin with is a single block
of memory.
So, if you have an array, should think of
it as something which has consecutive elements
storing the values in the array.
So, if you have an array A of size n, then
A 0 is immediately followed by A 1 and so
on until A n minus 1.
So, the crucial fact now is that if I know
where the array starts, then if I want to
get to some value A i, then I just have to
multiply by i, the size of each unit of array
to find out exactly where A i is.
So, this amounts to saying that we can access
any value A i, any position i in the array
in constant time regardless of whether i is
the beginning or at the end because we just
have to compute the offset.
So, we have the starting position and then
given i, we can compute directly in one shot
just doing arithmetic with respect to the
starting address, the position of A i.
Now, on the other hand, if I want to insert
an element between A i and A i plus 1, this
becomes a bit complicated that because, supposing
I now want to push a value here; that means,
I have to take these values and move them
down,; that means, each of these value has
to be shifted by 1.
Therefore, the time taken to insert an element
depends on the position, but in the worst
case I might have to shift all the elements
by 1.
So, this could take time proportional to the
size of the array.
So, this could be a order n operations.
The same way contraction can require me to
take an array and then if I want to remove
this element, then I have to shift all of
these elements up by 1.
So, if I want to expand or contract an array,
it is an expensive operation, but I can access
any given element in an array in a fixed cost
time which is independent of the position.
And I can just treat it as like any other
access, like accessing a variable x or y or
anything else simple in my program.
A list on the other hand is generally a flexible
structure and as elements are added, they
gets scattered around the memory with no fixed
relationship to each other.
So, typically a list will have values in different
parts of the memory and the idea is that each
value will points to the next.
So, supposing this is the beginning of the
list, then this will point to the next element,
this will point to the third element, this
will point to the fourth element and so on.
So, because of this linking structure usually
in most introductory data structures courses,
lists are often referred to as linked list.
So, linked list is just a concrete way of
implementing such a flexible structure.
So, now what this means is that, if I want
to find where say l 2 is so, let us assume
that this is l 0, l 1 and l 2.
Then, I have no idea in general, where l 2
is located, but I know where l 0 is located,
because my list name in my program l will
point to l 0.
So, I will have to follow these arrows until
I reach l 2.
So, in general if I want to go to A i, I have
to start at A 0, then follow my link to A
1 and so, on.
So, this will take me i steps,.
So, therefore, the further down in a list
I need to go, the longer it takes me.
So, accessing A i is proportional to i.
So, in general if I have to access the i-th
element of a list it is a linear time operation.
On the other hand, inserting and deleting
is comparatively easy, if I know where I am,
supposing I want to insert something between
l 2 and l 3, then what I would do is I would
first construct a new node here and then I
will do what I would call plumbing.
So, I will remove this link and I would instead,
insert a link from l 2 to the new node and
from the new node to l 3 and I know which
links to add, because this is a node I have
just created.
So, I know its location and l 2 points to
l 3.
So, I can transfer that information to the
new node so, that these links can be established.
And a similar thing happens when I want to
delete a node, if I want to delete this node
for example, then what I have to do is, I
just take this link and I bypass it and go
directly.
So, by just shuffling these links around,
in a local sense in a constant amount of time,
we can insert or delete at any point in a
list.
But, finding the position requires me to start
at the beginning and go the end, which takes
linear time.
So, this distinction has an impact on what
we can do.
Suppose, we want to take a sequence of values
and we want to take a value at position i
and position j and I want to exchange them.
So, if I know the positions i and j, in an
array I can easily get to A i and A j in constant
time and exchange them.
So, this is exactly like swapping x and y
and no difference in swapping x and y, and
swapping A i and A j.
But, if it is a list, then I have to walk
down to find this, then I have to walk down
to find that.
So, I have find these two things and then
I have to exchange.
So, it will take me a linear time just to
locate the positions to exchange.
On the other hand, as we have already seen,
if you wanted to delete an element from the
middle of a list or we want to insert an element
into a list, this takes constant time, provided
we are already at A i.
So, if we reach A i and we find at this position
you want to do something we can do that operation,
insertion or deletion in constant time.
But, at that position, if you want to insert
a value or contract the array, then we have
to shift a whole number of elements forwards
or backwards and this will take linear time.
So, sometimes this impacts what we can do,
and algorithms that work well on one data
structure will not work in the other, though
they are abstractly representing the same
thing, a sequence of values from one to n
or 0 to n minus 1.
As an example of this, we will see soon binary
search.
Binary search works on arrays, but does not
work on list, because it requires us to repeatedly
probe the array at some index i in an efficient
way.